---
layout: post
date: 2026-03-18 17:17:00 +0800
title: Performative Nationalism
slug: performative-nationalism
tags: [personal,politics,law]
---

# Performative Nationalism

> "The crisis consists precisely in the fact that the old is dying and the new cannot be born; in this interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms appear." — Antonio Gramsci, Prison Notebooks

Randy David notes that there is a interregnum where the old Philippine politics of feudalism and patronage has to give way to the new politics that implement the democratic ideals and institutions. The old, not dying, but donning the mask and robe of the new, transforms into the monster that uses the language of democracy to perpetuate itself in power. 

Social media discourse lately is replete with abstract legal and national concepts like sovereignty, the rule of law, and due process. However, they are invoked not as institutional concepts, but as rhetorical shields. This nationalist vocabulary is being hijacked by the very figures who historically viewed these institutions as obstacles.

We find that sovereignty is now weaponized to deflect external accountability. The rule of law is weakened to favor strong personality cults and dynasts. Due process is invoked by the people who mischaracterized and attacked human rights. Legal concepts like *mala in se* and *mens rea* are uttered in the same breath as the defense of demeaning and misogynist rhetoric within government halls. Here, nationalism becomes a performamce, a farce for the powerful rather than a safeguard from within and without. It is now a robe donned by actors in a theater for the loyalist die hards.

As Mina Roces observes, the gears of government are made tools to support the consolidation of power within a few groups or families. Instead of an ideal for a progressive state, it becomes a vehicle of rebranding dynastic interest as the national interest. This creates a fake nationalism that performs a celebration of the agency and voice of the Filipino people while effectively treating the State as a private property for the kin and retinue.

The law is reduced to a weapon to be wielded against the political rivals and the marginalized. For those within the group, however, the law is expected to be infinitely flexible. This thinking is exposed when those outside the group, people are quickly branded as enemies who should be wary of their lives once the kin takes power. 

The birth of a true new Philippines remains stalled so long as our nationalism remains a tool and performance to perpetuate the same idolized politicians and their family in power. Ending the interregnum requires what David calls a "mental revolution." We must move from being mere fans who seek favors from patrons to belong to the group in power. We must become the true collective sovereign who demand accountability from our public servants. True nationalism is not found in the defense of an idol, but in the subordination of the personal and familial benefit to the *bonum commune*, the public and common good.

